David Bell Lopez is a professor of
international and comparative politics
at the federal University of mines and
joins us from Bell Horizon in Brazil
good to have you with us uh uh on the
program it does seem that when Lula D
Silva speaks South America and the
global audience sit up and take note how
important is it for Brazil's leader to
say what he says in the way that he says
it that's a good question because Brazil
under Lula has become a prominent player
on the international scenario again and
uh if you take the numbers uh it
explains quite a lot Brazil accounts for
half of the territory the economy and
the population of South America so when
Brazil speaks uh it speaks I mean it
projects uh voice of South America to
the rest of the world in terms of the
recall of the Brazilian Ambassador back
to
Brazilia it's not not the first South
American country to do this early on in
this conflict in Gaza Chile Colombia
Honduras and Bolivia cut diplomatic ties
very quickly why do you think president
Silva
waited it took a while for him to find
the right tone the right approach so
you're right when you when you remember
that many other countries in South
America and mostly uh left-wing
governments they have decided to cut
ties with Israel uh much before Brazil
but over the last three4 weeks I'd say
Brazil has been escalating so the tone
has been
elevated and of course the circumstances
both domestic and international uh have
been important to explain to account for
this change do we expect that tone to
become stronger or more vocal as Brazil
takes the president prescy of both the
G20 and then the Financial Group
bricks I don't think it's going to
become stronger or even stronger because
it's already reached aned height and uh
so the the the I believe the the next
steps would involve some efforts in
order to uh reconcile and to calm down
the atmosphere The Diplomatic
atmosphere uh because at the moment uh
relations are really t between the two
countries so it cannot go any any tensor
or any I mean any any more uh uh
intoxicated uh so the tendency is
exactly the opposite I believe the
countries will find ways to collaborate
I don't know how but they might and of
course one of the big issues that
President Silva has to be concerned
about is his demestic audience there is
a sizable Jewish community in Brazil
over 10 million Arabs he walks a very
fine line doesn't he when it comes to
making sure that he can get keep his
public on side at
least uh actually it do yes we in Brazil
have around
150,000 uh Jewish people in in the
country and uh they uh exert lots of
power in some uh specific issue areas uh
and they of course they might have an
upper hand in determining the kind of
foreign policy in the past at least they
would have a lot of I mean uh room to
maneuver and they would be very
influential in defining the the
guidelines the the the the lines of
Brazil's foreign policy but nowadays I
think things might have changed a little
bit uh because Lula he doesn't seem to
be fearing the consequences of fighting
this uh stance the Israeli stance for
the question of Gaza so probably his
found Lula the president of Brazil has
found something to fight for and which
can be very rewarding for him and for
his interests in international Affairs
would you say that it's also reflective
of the glob the leaders of the global
South we're seeing leaders in Africa
Asia uh and the Americans certainly find
their voice they know that they're going
to come up against to brick wall when it
comes to the US's position on on Israel
and Palestine and as you say he's found
his voice but it seems that there is a
ground swell of opinion that goes beyond
politicians as well it's the public too
politicians are watching what's going on
in their countries most of all uh
president uh Lula D Silva as well he
knows how Brazilians
feel I could not agree more with you and
Lula possibly has that in mind when he
he uttered his words very strong words
with regard to the war to the conflict
in Gaza uh of course he was considering
uh the support he might Garner from the
global South after all there are some
130 countries in the world that would
recognize the Palestinian State as a
full-fledged Territorial state while
condemning Israel for uh the military
operations car out in Gaza at the moment
so of course Lula has considered in his
calculations this kind of landscape
interesting times uh Mr bellm Lopez
thank you so much for joining us for
mines really appreciate your time thank
you thanks for having me